The number of criminal corruption cases judged in Portugal in the last 14 years has increased fivefold (see tables). According to official data from the Legislative Policy and Planning Office (GPLP) of the Ministry of Justice, the number of cases in the trial phase ending in lower court courts rose from nine in 1986 to 46 (provisional data) in 2000. The number of defendants tried for corruption also experienced a substantial increase during the period analyzed. In 1984 there were only five and in 2000 there were already 62 people accused of corruption. Of the defendants over the last 15 years, on average, 65 percent ended up being convicted.
GPLP data indicates, however, that, during the last decade, only a quarter of corruption crimes registered by police authorities reached the courts. In 1999, of the 353 corruption crimes registered, only nine percent (32) were prosecuted. This indicates a number of dark figures whose magnitude no one knows, but, if we take into account the seriousness of the perception of the phenomenon in some political speeches and the conviction commonly expressed by the Portuguese in polls and other opinion studies, then corruption is really what Everyone knows it but no one has seen it.
In Portugal, the word corruption has been growing in importance in the lexicon of citizens and the President of the Republic. In his speeches, Jorge Sampaio has demonstrated a concern, unusual in other political leaders, about the problems affecting the political system. He has called for reforms, demanded legislative changes and a new ethical standard in politics, he has spoken out against the cancer of corruption and the money without a visible owner that wanders around party and campaign financing.
The President of the Republic has long asked parties for a "pact of courage" to change the law on party financing, the rules governing incompatibilities between political office holders and to take up the fight against corruption. By now, however, Jorge Sampaio must be getting tired of the apparent deafness that has affected the parties, namely the PS and PSD, to change even a comma in the part referring to the political system. Regarding corruption, the current Minister of Justice, António Costa, took an important step with the legislative package that he took to Parliament last September and which was generally approved. Costa, at least, puts an end to the scandal that was the incorporation of the crimes of money laundering and influence peddling into Portuguese legislation in such terms that made a good investigation almost impossible.
But the effective reform of legislation and the tax administration machinery is considered an essential step to improve the fight against corruption by inspector-coordinator Teófilo Santiago, who was once number two in the Central Directorate for Investigating Corruption, Fraud and Economic-Financial Infractions (DCICFIEF). This experienced member of the Judiciary Police, currently posted in Brazil as a liaison officer to the Brazilian police authorities, highlights as a priority the improvement of the collection and cross-referencing of information regarding IRS, IRC, VAT and assets subject to registration and taxation due to presumption of income, that is, of those who show external signs of wealth.
Speaking to PÚBLICO, Teófilo Santiago defends the elimination of banking secrecy and the crossing of data obtained from accounts with tax information. It also points to the collection and processing of transnational banking information (or, at least, information that leaves the European Union) for tax purposes, as well as the imposition of limitations on the activity of companies based in "off-shores", along the lines of of what most European governments now seem to want to do. An example: mandatory identification of the respective shareholdings until the complete identification of the individual subjects who oblige them or, in another hypothesis, the obligation to establish a representative residing in Portugal with powers to represent the company or respond to it.
From this researcher\'s perspective, it is also necessary to exclude from the scope of the rules for the protection of professional secrecy all lawyers who carry out or intermediate financial transactions and also an effective inhibition of the exercise of positions by private entities with interests in areas in which holders of political positions previously worked and extension of this principle to family members.
Teófilo Santiago considers it essential to grant the Judiciary Police inspection powers and access to tax and banking information in the precise terms in which they are currently attributed to the tax administration following the new general tax law, approved by the reform led by Pina Moura and Ricardo Sá Fernandes . On the criminal level, Santiago defends that the PJ should be given powers similar to those of the extinct High Authority against Corruption, currently granted to the General Directorate of Contributions and Taxes and the General Directorate of Customs and Special Taxes on Consumption. Finally, this framework advocates reviewing the extent of the penalty for the crime of corruption, with special attention to corruption for a lawful act.
To fully understand the chaos that has been the fight against corruption in Portugal, it is important to go back to 1993. This was a landmark year in the attitude of the political power and the judiciary in relation to combating this crime. There were media trials, unexpected roles for judges and public prosecutors and corruption became the talk of the world.
A certain "culture of corruption", an expression used by the then Attorney General of the Republic, Cunha Rodrigues, at the beginning of 1993, which was beginning to spread in Portuguese society, emerged, definitively, in the last years of the Cavaquist consulate to the point of leading the PSD Government itself, the Judiciary Police and the Public Ministry to elect it as the most complex problem in the country. The diagnosis seems to have been made, but the results continue to be few.'